README.md, before:

# MESA2HYDRO

## Documentation
Read the paper

	Refereed: https://iopscience.iop.org/article/10.3847/1538-4357/ab3405/meta

	Free: https://arxiv.org/abs/1907.09062

Read the User's Guide:

	https://github.com/mjoyceGR/MESA2HYDRO/blob/master/DOCUMENTATION/MESA2HYDRO_users_guide.pdf

## Introduction
From discrete stellar structure data in the style of MESA (http://mesa.sourceforge.net/) density profiles, this package creates initial conditions (IC) files readable by smoothed-particle hydrodynamics (SPH) codes such as Phantom (https://phantomsph.bitbucket.io/).  

The primary purpose of this software is to generate "NR" files that parameterize the mass distribution in an arbitrary model star.

An NR file is a basic text file containing 4 columns of numerical data: 
(1) integer N (dimensionless),
(2) radii (cm),
(3) masses M (grams), and
(4) internal energy (ergs).

The first column contains the integer used by HEALPix to determine the number of particles (np) distributed over a spherical shell--see the HEALPix papers for more information. 

The radii represent midpoint values rmid = (ru + rl) / 2 , in physical units (cm), corresponding to the radius at which a given shell must be placed in order to recast the mass contained in a region ru - rl as a shellular distribution of particles. The third column contains the mass contained in the computed interval. The fourth contains the internal energy (cgs units) at the midpoint radius.
The length of the file corresponds to the number of shells needed to reconstruct the sampled 1D density profile as a 3D particle distribution built of concentric shells. 


## Installation
Via pip:

	pip install MESA2HYDRO


In some cases, "pip2" and "python2" should replace "pip" and "python", respectively (i.e. if your default version is Python3--we will be releasing this package for Python3 shortly)

To upgrade, run

	pip install --upgrade MESA2HYDRO==0.1.24

where 0.1.24 is the lastest version number on https://pypi.org/manage/project/MESA2HYDRO/releases/

Sometimes the error 

	ERROR: Cannot uninstall 'MESA2HYDRO'. It is a distutils installed project and thus we cannot accurately determine which files belong to it which would lead to only a partial uninstall.

is triggered by an attempt to use pip install --upgrade. As a workaround, remove any current installation of MESA2HYDRO, followed by 

	pip install MESA2HYDRO==0.1.24

or 

	pip install MESA2HYDRO

for the most recent version.
<!-- Because this is a distutils-installed package, it cannot be fully uninstalled by pip. To upgrade via pip, remove the current version and run the -->


Alternatively, clone the git repository, unpack it, and run the following from the top level directory: 

	python2 setup.py install

to set up all dependencies manually.

## Setup
If you have installed the package via pip, pip will place the MESA2HYDRO home directory with other Python packages, most likely somewhere like

	/usr/share/bin/python2.7/

If you've failed to specify pip2 and have later versions of Python installed, it may end up somewhere like

	~/anaconda/lib/python3.5/site-packages/

In any case, you may want to copy or move the entire MESA2HYDRO root directory somewhere more sensible, since you will need to work out of it directly: 

	mv MESA2HYDRO/ /home/your_name/

From there, you should set the $MESA2HYDRO_ROOT environment variable in your .bashrc to point to the root directory:

	export MESA2HYDRO_ROOT=/home/your_name/MESA2HYDRO

Then

	cd MESA2HYDRO/




## Running a test case
To successfully run a basic MESA2HYDRO instance via

	./run_conversion.py mainsequence_test.cfg

the user must have, at minimum, the following Python and external packages installed on their machine:

 	argparse
	cython
	healpy
	matplotlib.pyplot
	numpy
  	python-tk
	random
  	scipy.interpolate
	scipy.optimize
	time

If they were not automatically installed via pip or the setup procedure, these can be installed from the command line via, e.g., 

	sudo apt-get install python-tk

or similarly via, e.g., 

	pip install numpy 

The authors have had better results installing these additional libraries via command line rather than through pip. 

In particular, one must have numerical and other libraries required by healpy/HEALPix (https://healpy.readthedocs.io/en/latest/) installed on their machine. The installation command for healpy is:

	pip install healpy

More information on dealing with healpy can be found at https://healpy.readthedocs.io/en/latest/install.html


## Prerequisites
For a complete list of Python and external software dependencies, see the Prerequisites section of the user's guide.

This project was designed to interface with MESA version 10398, using example inlists and input models (e.g. wd.mod) sourced from data provided within mesa-r10398. See 1D-MESA2HYDRO-3D user's guide.


## Operation
Basic operation proceeds from the "work" subdirectory via

	python2 run_conversion.py <filename>.cfg

See 1D-MESA2HYDRO-3D user's guide for more detailed information.

## Common Installation Issues
Some failures to install can be rectified by installing python-dev via 
	
	sudo apt-get install python-dev

Commit message:

warn people to avoid pip

README.md, after:

# MESA2HYDRO

## Documentation
Read the paper

	Refereed: https://iopscience.iop.org/article/10.3847/1538-4357/ab3405/meta

	Free: https://arxiv.org/abs/1907.09062

Read the User's Guide:

	https://github.com/mjoyceGR/MESA2HYDRO/blob/master/DOCUMENTATION/MESA2HYDRO_users_guide.pdf

## Introduction
From discrete stellar structure data in the style of MESA (http://mesa.sourceforge.net/) density profiles, this package creates initial conditions (IC) files readable by smoothed-particle hydrodynamics (SPH) codes such as Phantom (https://phantomsph.bitbucket.io/).  

The primary purpose of this software is to generate "NR" files that parameterize the mass distribution in an arbitrary model star.

An NR file is a basic text file containing 4 columns of numerical data: 
(1) integer N (dimensionless),
(2) radii (cm),
(3) masses M (grams), and
(4) internal energy (ergs).

The first column contains the integer used by HEALPix to determine the number of particles (np) distributed over a spherical shell--see the HEALPix papers for more information. 

The radii represent midpoint values rmid = (ru + rl) / 2 , in physical units (cm), corresponding to the radius at which a given shell must be placed in order to recast the mass contained in a region ru - rl as a shellular distribution of particles. The third column contains the mass contained in the computed interval. The fourth contains the internal energy (cgs units) at the midpoint radius.
The length of the file corresponds to the number of shells needed to reconstruct the sampled 1D density profile as a 3D particle distribution built of concentric shells. 


## Installation
Cloning this git repository or downloading the tar file is the safest way to get all dependencies. Clone it, unpack it, and run the following from the top level directory: 

	python2 setup.py install

to set up all dependencies manually.

MESA2HYDRO is also theoretically available via pip:

	pip install MESA2HYDRO


In some cases, "pip2" and "python2" should replace "pip" and "python", respectively (i.e. if your default version is Python3--we will be releasing this package for Python3 shortly)

To upgrade, run

	pip install --upgrade MESA2HYDRO==0.1.24

where 0.1.24 is the lastest version number on https://pypi.org/manage/project/MESA2HYDRO/releases/

Sometimes the error 

	ERROR: Cannot uninstall 'MESA2HYDRO'. It is a distutils installed project and thus we cannot accurately determine which files belong to it which would lead to only a partial uninstall.

is triggered by an attempt to use pip install --upgrade. As a workaround, remove any current installation of MESA2HYDRO, followed by 

	pip install MESA2HYDRO==0.1.24

or 

	pip install MESA2HYDRO

for the most recent version.
<!-- Because this is a distutils-installed package, it cannot be fully uninstalled by pip. To upgrade via pip, remove the current version and run the -->

## Pip Warning
Pip sometimes has issues with healpy and cython, both of which are required. You can install these separately via 

	sudo apt-get install cython

or equivalent, BEFORE running pip install, or avoid this all together by downloading the package tarball and setting it up manually


## Setup
If you have installed the package via pip, pip will place the MESA2HYDRO home directory with other Python packages, most likely somewhere like

	/usr/share/bin/python2.7/

If you've failed to specify pip2 and have later versions of Python installed, it may end up somewhere like

	~/anaconda/lib/python3.5/site-packages/

You can locate the package by typing

	pip show MESA2HYDRO

You may want to copy or move the entire MESA2HYDRO root directory somewhere where it is easier to work out of it directly 

	mv MESA2HYDRO/ /home/your_name/

From there, you should set the $MESA2HYDRO_ROOT environment variable in your .bashrc to point to the root directory:

	export MESA2HYDRO_ROOT=/home/your_name/MESA2HYDRO

Then

	cd MESA2HYDRO/




## Running a test case
To successfully run a basic MESA2HYDRO instance via

	./run_conversion.py mainsequence_test.cfg

the user must have, at minimum, the following Python and external packages installed on their machine:

 	argparse
	cython
	healpy
	matplotlib.pyplot
	numpy
  	python-tk
	random
  	scipy.interpolate
	scipy.optimize
	time

If they were not automatically installed via pip or the setup procedure, these can be installed from the command line via, e.g., 

	sudo apt-get install python-tk

or similarly via, e.g., 

	pip install numpy 

The authors have had better results installing these additional libraries via command line rather than through pip. 

In particular, one must have numerical and other libraries required by healpy/HEALPix (https://healpy.readthedocs.io/en/latest/) installed on their machine. The installation command for healpy is:

	pip install healpy

More information on dealing with healpy can be found at https://healpy.readthedocs.io/en/latest/install.html


## Prerequisites
For a complete list of Python and external software dependencies, see the Prerequisites section of the user's guide.

This project was designed to interface with MESA version 10398, using example inlists and input models (e.g. wd.mod) sourced from data provided within mesa-r10398. See 1D-MESA2HYDRO-3D user's guide.


## Operation
Basic operation proceeds from the "work" subdirectory via

	python2 run_conversion.py <filename>.cfg

See 1D-MESA2HYDRO-3D user's guide for more detailed information.

## Common Installation Issues
Some failures to install can be rectified by installing python-dev via 
	
	sudo apt-get install python-dev
